+++
title = "Free and Cofree"
author = ["purefunctor"]
date = 2022-02-28T00:00:00+08:00
tags = ["fp", "blog-post"]
draft = false
+++

Some fleeting thoughts I have about `Free` and `Cofree`...

<!--more-->


## Table of Contents {#table-of-contents}

<div class="ox-hugo-toc toc">

<div class="heading">Table of Contents</div>

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [`Cofree` is the dual of `Free`](#cofree-is-the-dual-of-free)
- [Deriving `Mu f`](#deriving-mu-f)
    - [Using `Free f Void`](#using-free-f-void)
    - [Using `Cofree f Unit`](#using-cofree-f-unit)
- [Cofree in Practice](#cofree-in-practice)
    - [Cofree as an infinite stream](#cofree-as-an-infinite-stream)

</div>
<!--endtoc-->


## Introduction {#introduction}

I recently tweeted that:

> I like to think of `Free` and `Cofree` in terms of combinators.
>
> `Free f a` makes it easy to use `f` as a fixed point, by having the choice of either termination or recursion.
>
> `Cofree f a` does the same in terms of recursion, albeit without the termination.

As it turns out, I was pretty close to an intuitive definition.


## `Cofree` is the dual of `Free` {#cofree-is-the-dual-of-free}

"Co-" is typically used as a prefix to denote the categorical dual of some concept. For example, coproduct (read: sum) types are the categorical dual of product types. Similarly, the convention can also be observed in `Monad` and `Comonad`.

The duality of `Free` and `Cofree` can be observed without taking into account their roots in category theory. `Free` is encoded using a sum type—on the other hand, `Cofree` is encoded using a product type.

```haskell
data Free f a = Pure a | Roll (f (Free f a))

data Cofree f a = CofreeCons a (f (Cofree f a)
```

If this isn't convincing from a practical standpoint, take a look at how `Free` and `Cofree` is folded and unfolded respectively. If you squint hard enough, you can see the signatures for the `cata` and `ana` recursion schemes, which they themselves are duals.

```haskell
runFree :: forall f a. Functor f => (f (Free f a) -> Free f a) -> Free f a -> a

cata :: forall f a. (f a -> a) -> Mu f -> a

buildCofree :: forall f s a. Functor f => (s -> Tuple a (f s)) -> s -> Cofree f a

ana :: forall f a. (a -> f a) -> a -> Mu f
```

This puts into mind the duality of recursion and corecursion. Recursion involves folding compounded data into a base case, while corecursion involves unfolding a seed into compounded data. In the same vein, `Free f` and `Cofree f` can be treated as combinators that provide the least and greatest fixed point of `f` respectively. This is discussed in the following section.


## Deriving `Mu f` {#deriving-mu-f}

In PureScript, `Mu f` is a type which provides the least fixed point of some functor `f`. It essentially allows the construction of recursive data types without any form of self-reference, similar to how the `fix` function at the term-level allows recursion in a lambda. That said, type `f` type is responsible for providing a base case such that a finite `Mu f` can be built.

```haskell
newtype Mu f = In (f (Mu f))
```


### Using `Free f Void` {#using-free-f-void}

`Mu f` can be derived from `Free` by making the `Pure` constructor impossible to use. This can be achieved through the use of `Void`, which has no constructors and as such, cannot exist at the term-level.

```haskell
Free f Void = Pure Void | Roll (f (Free f Void))

Free f Void = Roll (f (Free f Void))
```


### Using `Cofree f Unit` {#using-cofree-f-unit}

`Mu f` can be derived from `Cofree` by making the head in `CofreeCons` to always be inhabited by a single value. This can be achieved through the use of `Unit`, which always has a single constructor and as such, can be eliminated from the constructor.

```haskell
Cofree f Unit = CofreeCons Unit (f (Cofree f Unit))

Cofree f Unit = CofreeCons (f (Cofree f Unit))
```


## Cofree in Practice {#cofree-in-practice}

To motivate the use of `Cofree`, here are a few examples that I've synthesized. I'm not discussing `Free` here as its primary use-case of turning regular functors into monads warrants its own post.


### Cofree as an infinite stream {#cofree-as-an-infinite-stream}

`Cofree Id a` encodes an infinite stream of values of type `a`. The stream is built using `buildCofree` and a coalgebra describing how the seed can synthesize a return value as well as another seed which will be used in the future. This is a practical example of corecursion: we're not moving towards a base case nor do we have the option to terminate.

```haskell
module Main where

import Prelude

import Control.Comonad.Cofree (Cofree, buildCofree, head, tail)
import Data.Tuple (Tuple(..))
import Effect (Effect)
import Effect.Console (logShow)
import Data.Functor.Polynomial (Id(..))

factorial_ :: Cofree Id Int
factorial_ = buildCofree coal seed
  where
  seed :: Tuple Int Int
  seed = Tuple 0 1

  coal :: Tuple Int Int -> Tuple Int (Id (Tuple Int Int))
  coal (Tuple n f) = Tuple f (Id (Tuple (n + 1) (f * (n + 1))))

factorial :: Int -> Int
factorial = flip go factorial_
  where
  go 0 = head
  go n = tail >>> case _ of
    Id co -> go (n - 1) co

main :: Effect Unit
main = do
  logShow $ factorial 5
```
