+++
title = "ǤǤǤǤ (riririri)"
author = ["purefunctor"]
date = 2022-06-06T00:00:00+08:00
tags = ["fp", "blog-post"]
draft = false
+++

or the experience of writing a performant compiler in Rust as a functional programmer...

<!--more-->


## Table of Contents {#table-of-contents}

<div class="ox-hugo-toc toc">

<div class="heading">Table of Contents</div>

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Contents](#contents)
    - [Aethereal Arenas](#aethereal-arenas)
    - [Intrepid Interning](#intrepid-interning)
    - [Tactical Tokenization](#tactical-tokenization)
- [Miscellaneous](#miscellaneous)

</div>
<!--endtoc-->


## Introduction {#introduction}

These past few weeks, I've been spending most of my free time practicing Rust by building a [small functional programming language called lily](https://github.com/PureFunctor/lily.git). I've decided to write it in said language for two reasons: fun is a mandatory answer, of course, but I really wanted to explore what it's like to write performant programs from scratch in a language and field that I've never really spent much time on.

My experience with C and C++ were often riddled with unsafe and undefined behavior, and I can say for certain that I've been unproductive with these languages. On the other hand, I feel like I'm most productive when I have a direct discourse with the compiler, like I do with Haskell and PureScript.

From what I've seen so far, the Rust compiler `rustc` does an exceptional job at presenting errors to developers. Here's an example of how errors are served by `rustc` during compilation.

```rust
error[E0502]: cannot borrow `arena` as mutable because it is also borrowed as immutable
  --> lily-cst/src/lib.rs:71:5
   |
62 |     let interners = Rc::new(Interners::new(&arena));
   |                                            ------ immutable borrow occurs here...
71 |     arena.reset();
   |     ^^^^^^^^^^^^^ mutable borrow occurs here
72 |     println!("{:?}", result);
   |                      ------ immutable borrow later used here
```

That being said, this _loooong_-form blog post is quite different from my previous post, [Free and Cofree]({{< relref "20220228083102-free_and_cofree.md" >}}), as it also serves as a "rolling" mind map while I'm developing the `lily` compiler.


## Contents {#contents}

TBW...


### Aethereal Arenas {#aethereal-arenas}

TBW...


### Intrepid Interning {#intrepid-interning}

TBW...


### Tactical Tokenization {#tactical-tokenization}

TBW...


## Miscellaneous {#miscellaneous}

-   ǤǤǤǤ? [I'm not very creative when it comes to naming.](https://youtu.be/JsWanWImBaU)
